{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww8480\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0  Kitty, as she is usually called, is 18, has bad hips, and now gets medicated for chronic pain. She does a lot better on the medicine, less wailing in the middle of the day/night, more sleeping for us humans. She is still annoying, but just her normal level of annoying. And last night she apparently was feeling so much better that she decided to spring up into the window and venture onto the windowsill for some fresh air.\
\
But you have to understand this cat. This cat is old, really old. Like, she can\'92t even wash herself any more old. We brush her and cut the matts out as they form. We brought her litter to the upstairs bathroom because she couldn\'92t get up and down the stairs so well anymore. Kitty is skinny, picky about what she eats, and not exactly steady on her feet. Oftentimes when she is standing she will sway slightly trying to stand upright. But she also still really loves humans, and still loves to get her chin and jaw rubbed as long as you can keep doing it.\
\
And me? I was sitting on the floor, trying to meditate. I had opened the window and left it ajar for some air before sitting down. I had even closed the window down to be more narrow, because I was afraid the cat would want to try to go outside. Because it is a full story down to the walkway below, with an old camellia bush whose branches somewhat reach the window growing in a strip of dirt on the side. \
\
And so there I am, sitting with my eyes closed when the thump, thump and clack clack of nails register somewhere in my consciousness and my consciousness does whatever it does to compare those sounds and realize the cat has jumped up to the window. And no sooner do I get my eyes open and get up to go grab the cat before she can do anything stupid...I see her standing on the sill and then vanish from sight. I can\'92t believe my eyes.\
\
Not even wanting to lose the time it would take me to go to my window and look, I gather myself and head for the stairs, mind already racing, barely managing to get my voice to work enough to yell to Julie to wake up, her cat just jumped out of the window. By the time I\'92m halfway down the stairs, I already have run through the scenario and evaluated likely outcomes. That was a tall drop and a cement path directly below. None were good.\
\
I get down the stairs to the front hall and realize the cat is in the backyard, by the time I am down that hall and steps and turning the deadbolt, Julie is right behind me. I\'92m already coursing with adrenaline, prepared for the worst. But as soon as I get a few steps outside, here comes kitty, looking very confused, but completely intact, walking towards us .\
\
I still am not completely sure if that cat actually jumped down and knew what she was doing, or if she fell down and somehow managed to land in the bush and down to the dirt without breaking anything. She wasn\'92t really dirty, nor does she seem to have any injuries. But if you would see how off-balance she is day in and day out, it is a wonder she walked away from that, regardless of how she went down. \
\
}