{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww16340\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Synchronicity and finding a way forward\
\
93!\
\
So I wanted to write to you and let you know things that are going on in my life, as they are significant, at least to me. Although I am slow to publish in my blog, I am at least writing in my journal. It has been a difficult and frustrating time the last few weeks, the path so unclear. \
\
But then last Monday I got an email from a recruiter at Tesla about a job as a web developer there. I had reluctantly gone to a recruiting fair in the beginning of March, telling myself that it was the way to open up the possibilities for getting a job. I knew that I had to give the universe something to work with. Job fairs where you stand around trying to look intelligent aren\'92t exactly my cup of tea. But somehow, I went. \
\
Even with other job applications, and all the other recruiters I talked to at the job fair, there hadn\'92t been any serious interest in me until now. The recruiter doesn\'92t say even much in the email, just asks when I would have time to talk. I reply that Thursday was open, so Thursday 2pm was the phone interview appointment. I was so nervous, I didn\'92t even know how to prepare. And stoked, because Tesla is one of the places I feel isn\'92t in the game for mind control. Elon Musk may be a jerk sometimes, but I think he truly cares about humanity. And also really surprised, because I felt like I had been grilled by the two team members at the job fair, barely finding coherent answers. \
\
So Thursday promptly at 2pm my phone rings, and I spend about 7 mins on the phone with the recruiter. He\'92s got my resume, hears about my previous experience, tells me the next interview will be me presenting to a panel for 30 mins, 25 mins + 5 QA, on anything, as long as I teach something. And then after that to be prepared to meet people from the team in different offices throughout the day as they have time. Oh, and the office is moving from San Mateo (bad commute) to Fremont (decent commute) in May. \
\
This feels synchronous and strange on a few different levels. One, that I should be skipping all the coding ability testing and straight to a panel interview with (Two), a major company that I could stomach working for. Three, that the interview format is a presentation rather than a normal question and answer session. This is fairly unusual for a tech company, but because I have been teaching and lecturing these last few months, I am well prepared for it. Four, is that their offices are moving, I don\'92t have to move. Five, that was a seriously short phone interview session, usually they grill you. It feels so surreal.\
\
So I am going to take it that this is the Universe showing me the way. If I can have the guts to go for this job, it feels like I would get it. }