---
layout: post
title: Static Files in Django
category: dev
---

### Static Files
In addition to the html generated and served by each view method, Django handles all of the other files, such as css and images as "statics". There are some conventions used to keep things organized. First, create a `static` folder in each app directory that will need to store static assets. Django's `STATICFILES_FINDERS` will automatically round up all the files and store them in a pool, similar to how it works with `templates`. And for that reason, all the files need to be namespaced under their app's name within the static folder. A css file would have the following path `project/polls/static/polls/style.css`

As a basic example, the docs show how to load css into the html templates. Start by creating a `style.css` according to the file structure above, and then add the following trivial css.
```css
li a {
    color: green;
}
```

And then load it into the template like this:  
```py
{\% load static \%}

<link rel="stylesheet" href="{\% static 'polls/style.css' \%}">
```

Running the server (`python manage.py runserver`) should show the links changed to green.

Note that there are TWO imports happening here. The `{\% static \%}` template tag imports Django generated content, but is not available for use in static files which aren’t generated by Django, like the stylesheet. You should always use relative paths to link your static files between each other, because then you can change `STATIC_URL` (used by the static template tag to generate its URLs) without having to modify a bunch of paths in your static files as well.

Things to follow up on later as I start to work with static files:
- [Static files how-to](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/howto/static-files/)
- [The staticfiles app](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/ref/contrib/staticfiles/)
- [Deploying static files in production](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/howto/static-files/deployment/)